# mutt-wizard

Get this great stuff without effort:

- A full-featured and autoconfigured email client on the terminal with neomutt
- Mail stored offline so you can view and write email while away from internet and keep backups

Specifically, this wizard:

- Determines your email server's IMAP and SMTP servers and ports
- Creates dotfiles for `neomutt`, `isync`, and `msmtp` appropriate for your email address
- Encrypts and stores locally your password for easy remote access, accessible only by your GPG key
- Handles as many as nine separate email accounts automatically
- Auto-creates bindings to switch between accounts or between mailboxes
- Can automatically set mail updates as often as you want to sync your mail and update you when new mail arrives
- Provides sensible defaults and an attractive appearance for the neomutt email client
- If mutt-wizard doesn't know your server's IMAP/SMTP info by default, it will prompt you for them and will put them in all the right places.

## Install and Use

```
git clone https://github.com/LukeSmithxyz/mutt-wizard
cd mutt-wizard
sudo make install
```

The mutt-wizard is run with the command `mw`. It also installs the `mailsync` command. Once everything is setup, you'll use `neomutt` to access your mail.

- `mw add` -- add a new email account
- `mw ls` -- list existing accounts
- `mw pass` -- revise an account's password
- `mw delete` -- deleted an added account
- `mw purge` -- delete all accounts and settings
- `mw cron` -- toggle/configure a cronjob to sync mail

## Dependencies

- `neomutt` - the email client.
- `isync` - downloads and syncs the mail. (required at install)
- `msmtp` - sends the email.
- `pass` - safely encrypts passwords (required at install)

### Optional

- `w3m` - view HTML email and images in neomutt.
- `notmuch` - index and search mail. Install it and run `notmuch setup`, tell it that your mail is in `~/.local/share/mail/`. You can run it in mutt with `ctrl-f`. Run `notmuch new` to process new mail, although the included `mailsync` script does this for you.
- `abook` - a terminal-based address book. Pressing tab while typing an address to send mail to will suggest contacts that are in your abook.
- A cron manager - if you want to enable the auto-sync feature.

## Neomutt user interface

To give you an example of the interface, here's an idea:

- `m` - send mail (uses your default `$EDITOR` to write)
- `j`/`k` and `d`/`u` - vim-like bindings to go down and up (or `d`/`u` to go down/up a page).
- `l` - open mail, or attachment page or attachment
- `h` - the opposite of `l`
- `r`/`R` - reply/reply all to highlighted mail
- `s` - save selected mail or selected attachment
- `gs`,`gi`,`ga`,`gd`,`gS` - Press `g` followed by another letter to change mailbox: `s`ent, `i`nbox, `a`rchive, `d`rafts, `S`pam, etc.
- `M` and `C` - For `M`ove and `C`opy: follow them with one of the mailbox letters above, i.e. `MS` means "move to Spam".
- `i#` - Press `i` followed by a number 1-9 to go to a different account. If you add 9 accounts via mutt-wizard, they will each be assigned a number.
- `a` to add address/person to abook and `Tab` while typing address to complete one from book.
- `?` - see all keyboard shortcuts
- `ctrl-j`/`ctrl-k` - move up and down in sidebar, `ctrl-o` opens mailbox

## New stuff and improvements since the original release

- `isync`/`mbsync` has replaced `offlineimap` as the backend. Offlineimap was error-prone, bloated, used obsolete Python 2 modules and required separate steps to install the system.
- `mw` is now an installed program instead of just a script needed to be kept in your mutt folder.
- `dialog` is no long used (le bloat) and the interface is simply text commands.
- More autogenerated shortcuts that allow quickly moving and copying mail between boxes.
- More elegant attachment handling. Image/video/pdf attachments without relying on the neomutt instance.
- abook integration by default.
- The messy template files and other directories have been moved or removed, leaving a clean config folder.
- msmtp configs moved to `~/.config/` and mail default location moved to `~/.local/share/mail/`, reducing mess in `~`.
- `pass` is used as a password manager instead of separately saving passwords.
- Script is POSIX sh compliant.
- Error handling for the many people who don't read or follow directions. Less errors generally.

## Help the Project!

- Try mutt-wizard out on weird machines and weird email addresses and report any errors.
- Open a PR to add new server information into `domains.csv` so their users can more easily use mutt-wizard.
- If nothing else, [Donate!](https://paypal.me/LukeMSmith)

See Luke's website [here](https://lukesmith.xyz). Email him at [luke@lukesmith.xyz](mailto:luke@lukesmith.xyz).

mutt-wizard is free/libre software, licensed under the GPLv3.

## Details for Tinkerers

- The critical `mutt`/`neomutt` files are in `~/.config/mutt/`.
- Put whatever global settings you want in `muttrc`. mutt-wizard will add some lines to this file which you shouldn't remove unless you know what you're doing, but you can move them up/down over your personal config lines if you need to. If you get binding conflict errors in mutt, you might need to do this.
- Each of the accounts that mutt-wizard generates will have custom settings set in a separate file in `accounts/`. You can edit these freely if you want to tinker with settings specific to an account.
- Don't modify the `mutt-wizard.muttrc` file as it is the system default and will be overwritten on update. If you don't like any settings set there, you can override them in your `muttrc`.

## Watch our for these things:

- For Gmail accounts, remember also to enable third-party ("""less secure""") applications before attempting installation.
- Protonmail accounts will require you to set up "Protonmail Bridge" to access PM's IMAP and SMTP servers. Configure that before running mutt-wizard.
- If you have a university email, or enterprise-hosted email for work, there might be other hurdles or two-factor authentication you have to jump through. Some, for example, will want you to create a separate IMAP password, etc.
- If you use an email server whose mailboxes are not in English, mutt-wizard might not be able to guess which is which, so you may have to manually set your Inbox, Sent, Trash, Drafts, etc. in your mutt config file. Do this after running the wizard in `accounts/NAME.muttrc`.
